The Albanese Labor Government is Building Australia’s Future with a record $2 billion investment in the Australian-made aluminium industry, securing more well-paid jobs for Australian workers in our regions and suburbs.
Supercharging the local metals industry, a new Green Aluminium Production Credit will provide targeted support to Australian aluminium smelters switching to reliable, renewable electricity before 2036.
Facilities will be eligible for support for every tonne of clean, reliable Australian-made aluminium they make over a period of 10 years.
This Credit will provide local aluminium smelters with confidence to invest, paving the way for more secure Australian jobs in our world-class aluminium industry.
Labor’s plan for a Future Made in Australia is very clear: we want Australian workers to make more things here.
We’ve got all the ingredients right here for a world-leading metals industry – from the best solar and wind resources, to the critical minerals and facilities, as well as a highly skilled workforce.
From Gladstone to Portland and Bell Bay to Tomago - Australia is already the sixth largest producer of aluminium in the world and we want to see that continue to grow.
Increasingly the world is looking to import clean, reliable metals – like Australian-made aluminium – which represents a massive opportunity for growth in a decarbonising global economy.
Australia’s entire aluminium supply chain is uniquely located on shore - from bauxite mining to finished products, all produced from generations of Aussie know-how.
Not only will this deliver for economic wins for Australia, it will help significantly reduce emissions at the same time.
Securing the future of the Australian-made aluminium industry is a direct investment in jobs and skills across the country – all the way from Central Queensland to Northern Tasmania.
This is what Building Australia’s Future looks like and only a Labor Government will deliver it.
Quotes attributable to Prime Minister Anthony Albanese:
“Labor’s plan for a Future Made in Australia is very clear: we want Australia to make more things here.
“Investing in the Australian-made aluminium industry is a massive opportunity – to create well-paid jobs in our regions and suburbs, and set Australia up for the future.
“We’ve got the resources, the workers, and the know-how – the only thing we don’t have is time to waste.
“We are building Australia’s future, not taking Australia backwards.”
Quotes attributable to Minister for Industry and Science Ed Husic:
“Jobs up, emissions down and a secure future for our world-class aluminium industry – that’s what today’s announcement provides.
"With an entire aluminium supply chain uniquely located right here in Australia, we're well positioned to capture the rewards of the global green energy transition.
"Communities and businesses rely on aluminium smelters, and we have an opportunity to partner with the private sector to support these secure well-paying jobs into the future
“Backing our strengths, playing to our advantages and building a future for all Australians.”
Quotes attributable to Assistant Minister for Future Made in Australia Tim Ayres:
“The aluminium sector is a critical value-add industry for Australia and a crucial part of the Albanese Government’s Future Made in Australia plan.
“This package guarantees good blue collar jobs in the Hunter, Central Queensland, Northern Tasmania, Western Australia and Victoria.
“We know that Peter Dutton’s risky nuclear reactor plan requires the closure of Australian electricity-intensive manufacturing like aluminium refining.
“The biggest risk to aluminium and regional manufacturing is Peter Dutton’s Liberals.”