Prime Minister, Minister for Health and Aged Care, Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
The Morrison Government is investing an additional $52.3 million in funding for Lifeline Australia over four years from July 2022, in recognition of the critical support the service provides to Australians.
Combined with an extension of the annual funding of $15.5 million announced in the 2018-19 Budget, this takes the Morrison Government’s support for Lifeline’s core crisis service to $114.2 million over the next four years.
The new funding will help Lifeline to meet the growing level of demand for their support services, maintain and improve infrastructure and responsiveness, as well as investing in innovation in crisis response, surge capacity and models of care.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the additional $52.3 million in funding for Lifeline Australia would ensure millions more Australians would receive the help that they need, when they need it.
“We are boosting our support once again to ensure that Lifeline can continue to be one of Australia’s most trusted, greatest supporters both now and in the future,” the Prime Minister said.
“This funding means that next year Lifeline will be able to take an extra 176,000 calls or texts from Australians, or an extra 3,900 every day. By 2026, this will grow to an extra one million calls or texts from Australians every year.
“The critical role that Lifeline plays has never been more evident than in these recent years. When COVID had many Australians feeling like they were alone, Lifeline was there. When bushfires or floods left many feeling helpless, Lifeline was there. Or, when any given day had many feeling like life was tough, Lifeline was there.
“Lifeline is lifesaving, and that’s why our investment is so important.”
Minister for Health and Aged Care Greg Hunt said Lifeline had and continues to support Australians as we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic.
“Lifeline is Australia’s largest provider of suicide prevention services, which has been supporting Australians experiencing emotional distress for almost 60 years,” Minister Hunt said.
“Any member of the community can pick up the phone, send a text or go online and receive assistance from Lifeline. Their support has helped to save lives and to protect lives.
“The COVID-19 pandemic has seen more Australians reach out for help and our Government has provided more than $18 million in supplementary and emergency funding to the charity since 2019, to ensure they support as many Australians as possible.
“This has ensured more Australians get the crucial help they need.”
Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention David Coleman said the increased funding would help Lifeline continue to support more and more Australians in crisis.
“Right now, Lifeline is helping more Australians than ever, with daily calls to Lifeline averaging over 3,100 per day since the beginning of the year,” Assistant Minister Coleman said.
“Lifeline's 13 11 14 crisis support service is available 24/7. Australians can speak to a trained crisis supporter any time of the day or night.
“We offer our gratitude to Lifeline’s hardworking volunteers and staff, who have provided so much to the Australian community.”
The Morrison Government continues to invest in improving mental health outcomes for all Australians, investing a historic $2.3 billion in the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Plan through the 2021-22 Budget to deliver significant reform of the mental health system and ensure that all Australians have access to high quality, person-centred care as we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic.
To date, health portfolio expenditure in mental health and suicide prevention services and supports in 2021-22 is at a record high of $6.5 billion.