SOURCE: [^aoc22]
CITATION: NITV/SBS 2022
URL: https://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/article/ignorant-and-racist-pauline-hanson-slammed-for-walking-out-on-acknowledgement-of-country/9zd96glci
FETCHED: 2026-07-04 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Pauline Hanson has angrily left the Senate chamber during the opening Acknowledgement of Country after dismissing its validity.
President Sue Lines acknowledged the Ngunnawal and Ngambri people as Traditional Custodians of the Canberra area and paid respect to elders past and present at the opening of Wednesday's sitting.
Senator Hanson interjected, yelling "No, I won't and never will", before exiting the chamber.
The One Nation senator told AAP she could not accept the Welcome to Country or a proposal to be moved later in the day that would raise the Aboriginal flag in the Senate chamber.
"I've been feeling this way for a long time," she said.
"I have called from the first day for equality for all Australians. I see this as divisive."
She said if anyone needed acknowledgement it was "our people that have fought for this country. People who have sacrificed their lives".
Senator Hanson added the Indigenous flag had "never been voted on" and criticised the acknowledgement to country.
"I will never pay respect to (the flag). I find this flag divisive," she said.
"We are now hearing it on flights and aeroplanes. I'm sorry - this is my country as well.
"This is heading towards division in our nation. A them and us. And we'll never close the gap if we continue down this path. All Australians should be treated equally and the same."
In a statement provide to SBS News, Ms Hanson's office said she will refuse to Acknowledge Country in the Senate "from this point forward."
Indigenous Greens' senator Lidia Thorpe took to Twitter to criticise Senator Hanson, calling the action "disrespectful".
"Day two of the 47th parliament and racism has reared its ugly head," she wrote.
"Pauline Hanson disrespectfully stormed out of the acknowledgement of country in the Senate, refusing to acknowledge 'those people'.
"You want to make parliament safe? Get rid of racism."
Labor senator Jenny McAllister says the acknowledgement of country is "a courtesy ... that brings people together".
"Everyone has to make their own decision about how they behave in this place and what they bring to this place. It's up to Pauline Hanson to make her own decisions about," she told the ABC.
"But I am really clear about my position. Acknowledging country and acknowledging traditional owners is the right thing to do."
The lower house on Wednesday agreed to set up the first dedicated joint standing committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs.