SOURCE: [^ladbible22]
CITATION: LADbible
URL: https://www.ladbible.com/news/latest-pauline-hanson-tells-australian-first-nations-people-to-get-over-it-20220126
FETCHED: 2026-07-04 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Pauline Hanson has unleashed a shocking tirade against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people on Australia Day of all days.
Despite there being tens of thousands of people rallying through the streets of Australia today (January 26) who are calling for the public holiday to be moved to another day, it seems like the One Nation Senator has had enough.
The ever-growing campaign to #ChangetheDate has divided opinion every time the new year rolls round and Ms Hanson has been very clear where she stands.
In a video she posted on Facebook, the Senator said: "I hear so often those people who have a go at us. [They say] the land was invaded - and all the rest of it.
"You know what, get over it, move on. Stop making yourselves victims. It's not about victimhood.
"Everyone has a choice in life - you actually move on with your life and get over the problems that have happened in the past - we're talking about over 200 years ago.
"You choose what you want your future to be. You've got that many people out there wanting to give you a hand up - a helping hand."
She then gave the classic 'if you give a person a fish, you feed them for a day' parable and feels it works the same way with fixing the institutionalised and inter-generational problems that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people endure in Australia.
"Whether you were born here or you are holding your citizenship ceremony today and pledging your loyalty to our great nation, Australia Day is a time to celebrate everything that is great about our country," she added.
"If you don't like Australia Day, don't take the public holiday."
The public sentiment about Australia Day seems to grow more divided every year.
Proponents of changing the date call January 26 Invasion Day or Survival Day because it's when the First Fleet sailed into Port Jackson back in 1788.
That moment marks the starting point of hundreds of years of horrific physical, emotional, spiritual, cultural and political treatment against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, who had already been living in Australia for tens of thousands of years.
Considering that the #ChangeTheDate campaign has only grown with each passing year, it's clear that Pauline Hanson's mantra of 'get over it' isn't something that will be taken on board.