SOURCE: [^oa_menminority]
URL: https://www.openaustralia.org.au/senate/?id=2023-03-08.153.2
TITLE: Matters of Urgency: Gender Equality, Senate Hansard, 8 March 2023 (International Women's Day debate)
FETCHED: this session, via direct web_fetch. Full debate transcript, Hanson's contribution at 5:01pm excerpted below.

---VERIFIED EXCERPT (Pauline Hanson, Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party, 5:01 pm)---

I support helping women, but, no doubt, I will be the only woman today speaking for the most oppressed and neglected minority in Australia: men. It's ironic that the women who bring men into the world are so ready to dismiss and abandon them to boost their orthodox feminist credentials. In Australia men are severely overrepresented in suicides, prison, homelessness and unemployment. What is being done to close these enormous gaps? Nothing.

In particular, Australian men are severely disadvantaged in the family law system, and Labor has made it worse by removing shared parenting. Men deserve as much access to their children as women do. Men deserve acknowledgement as representing a quarter of domestic violence victims. Men deserve help with their health issues. Men deserve much more recognition by this government and this parliament. How about we start with a minister for men?

---
CONTEXT: This was a Greens-moved "Matter of Urgency" motion on women's safety, health and economic security (moved by Senator Larissa Waters) during the International Women's Day sitting. Other speakers: Dorinda Cox, Larissa Waters, Anne Ruston, Marielle Smith, Tammy Tyrrell, Helen Polley, Penny Allman-Payne, Barbara Pocock (all Greens/Labor/Liberal/JLN). Hanson's contribution is the only One Nation speech in the debate and is exactly as quoted above, no other Hanson content in this record.

USED FOR: Plane_4_Drive.md, Why.Where.How "The Shed" node header quote (replacing a prior netimes26/NPC citation about renewable energy subsidies that was thematically mismatched to the Shed's real referent, Men's Sheds Australia and male isolation/mental health, rather than small business finance).
