SOURCE: [^onenation_bradfield19]
CANONICAL URL: https://www.onenation.org.au/pauline-hanson-calls-for-construction-of-bradfield-and-ord-schemes-to-drought-proof-inland-australia/
FETCHED VIA (mirror, same content): https://shop.onenation.org.au/blogs/labor-ldp-plan-to-burn-cane-growers/pauline-hanson-calls-for-construction-of-bradfield-and-ord-schemes-to-drought-proof-inland-australia
TITLE: Pauline Hanson Calls for Construction of Bradfield and Ord Schemes to Drought Proof Inland Australia
DATE: Jan 29, 2019
FETCHED: this session, via direct web_fetch. Full video transcript below (Sky News "Paul Murray Live").

---FULL TEXT---

How water infrastructure can save the Murray-Darling Basin

There are two issues causing the majority of the problems we see with the Murray-Darling Basin, mismanagement and a lack of infrastructure. While Labor and Green politicians are saying we need to take more water out of the river system and flush it out to sea, One Nation is saying we need to build the infrastructure we need to make sure we have enough water for everyone. Let's build the dams and other infrastructure we need to capture the water where it is abundant and see that it goes to the places that need it!

Video Transcript:

Paul Murray: Let's finish off here with the very serious situation of what's happening in the Murray-Darling, where yet again another example of the huge collection of fish that have died... [discussion of fish kills and water management] ...Well, Pauline, why do you think this is happening?

Pauline Hanson: All right. You haven't got enough water flowing through the system. What I've been pushing for is the Bradfield Scheme that comes from North Queensland, the Herbert, Tully, and the Burdekin Rivers, to actually direct it inland. Flood inland Queensland, flow down to the Murray-Darling, and run it through. What they've done, and I've been on three-day tour from bus from Victoria through New South Wales, to the mouth of the Murray-Darling, it has been mismanaged terribly, they've actually sold off the water. You've got international interests that are owning the water. You've got an organisation, the Murray-Darling Management, has gone from 10 people up to over 300 people managing that. They've had the wetlands that they closed down in South Australia. There's so much I can tell you about it. The wrong decisions that they've made. The Bradfield Scheme was priced. The last price they had was $9 billion, put that in, build the Bradfield Scheme. Water inland Queensland. Bring it from the Ord, water inland, Australia from the Ord Scheme as well, and bring water inland and flush out our river systems. That's it. That's what I'd be doing.

[remainder of panel discussion omitted, not relevant to the cited claim]

VERIFIED: quote used in Plane_3_Land.md ("What I've been pushing for is the Bradfield Scheme...") is exact verbatim match.
