SOURCE: [^uluru19]
CITATION: The Brag
URL: https://thebrag.com/pauline-hanson-uluru/
FETCHED: 2026-07-04 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Batshit One Nation leader Pauline Hanson has, once again, offered up an offensively stupid take. In an interview with Today this morning, Hanson compared closing the sacred site of Uluru to climbers to shutting down Bondi Beach.
The Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Bark Board came to the decision in 2017 to close Uluru to climbers. Uluru is considered a sacred and holy landmark by the traditional owners of the land, the Anangu Aboriginal people. Since Uluru was returned to the original custodians in 1985, visitors have been implored not to step foot on the site. The ban is set to be put into effect in October.
Unfortunately for everyone, Hanson wasn’t able to find the strength to keep her gob shut about the decision.
“The fact is, it’s money-making,” she told Today. “It’s giving jobs to the Indigenous community, you’ve got over 4-500,000 tourists a year that want to go there and climb the rock.
“It’s no different to saying we’re going to close down Bondi Beach because there are some people there that have drowned. How ridiculous is that! This is an iconic site for all Australians.”
In news that is completely unsurprising, Hanson was unable to conjure up an ounce of cultural sensitivity towards the decision. “I can’t see the cultural sensitivity when people have been climbing the rock all these years and all of a sudden they want to shut it down? I don’t get it, I really don’t get it.”
We’re all very aware that you don’t get it, Pauline. What we don’t understand is why you continue to spew your vile ill-informed opinions.
Love Music?
Get your daily dose of metal, rock, indie, pop, and everything else in between.
Hanson’s comments come after photos emerged of tourists flocking to the site en masse to climb the rock before the closure is implemented. There has been a longstanding sign at the site requesting that people avoid climbing Uluru out of respect for the traditional owners.
This really is nuts.
The #Uluru climb two days ago. It closes for good in October.
📷Glenn Minett/ABC Alice Springs pic.twitter.com/sAFdfvpKwz
— Rohan Barwick (@rohwick) July 10, 2019
A sign at the site has long requested people avoid climbing the site out of respect of the wishes of traditional owners.
‘That’s a really important sacred thing that you are climbing. You shouldn’t climb. It’s not the real thing about this place. The real thing is listening to everything’ – a fact sheet by Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park states.
Back in May, a Pauline Hanson twitter stan account called out Nova radio host Smallzy for using racial slurs. Read more about it now.