SOURCE: [^alboeureka26]
CITATION: Anthony Albanese, Address welcoming Mark Carney to the Parliament of Australia, House of Representatives Hansard, 4 March 2026: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2026/mar/05/australia-politics-live-anthony-albanese-angus-taylor-parliament-question-time-labor-coalition-one-nation-middle-east-mark-carney-canada-iran-ntwnfb
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2026/mar/05/australia-politics-live-anthony-albanese-angus-taylor-parliament-question-time-labor-coalition-one-nation-middle-east-mark-carney-canada-iran-ntwnfb
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

And with that, we are going to shut the blog. Before we go, let’s recap the big healdines:
The federal minister for Indigenous Australians, Malarndirri McCarthy, announced there will be a parliamentary inquiry into racism, hate and violence directed at First Nations people.
The foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, welcomed the first flight from Dubai to Sydney carrying more than 230 Australians returning Wednesday, and has announced another three flights are scheduled to return Thursday. Speaking to journalists, Wong said there’s much more to do to get Australians home.
The treasurer, Jim Chalmers, faced questions on how the conflict in the Middle East will impact the budget due to be handed down in just over two months. Chalmers had a pretty decent day Wednesday off the back of some positive national accounts figures that showed Australia’s economic growth accelerated at the end of 2025.
The Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, softened his support for US and Israeli strikes on Iran, saying while he welcomed end of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s regime – “the principal source of instability and terror in the region” – he did not believe the attacks on Iran were legal, and they represent “another example of the failure of the international order”.
Six teams have been deployed to the Middle East to help with the mammoth consular effort, to get tens of thousands of Australians home. Wong said she was “deeply concerned” about the spread of conflict in the region with Iran engaging in attacks against 11 countries, including Turkey – a Nato country – overnight.
Victorian attorney general, Sonya Kilkenny, confirmed she is seeking advice to change the laws that allow the issuing of suppression orders for high-profile defendants.
The NSW premier, Chris Minns, said the state government will draft legislation for changes to roadside drug testing for medicinal cannabis users, a recommendation of its 2024 drug summit, following accusations it had “squibbed” the opportunity for major drug reform.
Last call for robodebt victims to sign up to class action suit
Lawyers running a class action on behalf of robodebt victims have urged victims to register for compensation before tomorrow’s deadline.
Gordon Legal is trying to identify potential class action members for a settlement of $475m, which it has agreed to with the federal government over the illegal robodebt scheme. The law firm initially settled with the government in 2021 for $112m, but has since appealed and agreed to a higher settlement.
So far, only a quarter of potentially eligible claimants have registered to receive compensation through the new settlement, with the deadline on Friday.
Andrew Grech, partner at Gordon Legal, said:
Tomorrow’s deadline is the last chance for robodebt victims to have their claims heard. More than 135,000 people have already registered, but with up to 482,530 potentially eligible, there are hundreds of thousands of Australians who may still be entitled to compensation and have not yet come forward.
Anyone impacted by the robodebt scheme needs to register before the 6th of March.
Sydney university students protest war on Iran despite threat of disciplinary action
University of Sydney anti-war protesters today went ahead with a speakout despite the risk of disciplinary action after they had been warned the action was “unacceptable”, reporters Daisy Dumas and Caitlin Cassidy write.
About 40 Students Against War protesters marched from the Law School to the United States Study Centre in protest against the war on Iran. The group claimed via Instagram on Wednesday that the university had attempted to shut the protest down:
USYD management has declared our protest against the bombing of Iran ‘unacceptable activity’ after security met with the US Studies Centre. We say the real unacceptable activity is the bombing, not the protest against it.
They are using the campus access policy in an attempt to silence opposition to our government and our university’s complicity in these crimes.
A University of Sydney spokesperson said protest organisers had been contacted because the speakout had not been planned in line with the university’s recently enacted campus access policy, which requires notice for all demonstrations.
Angus Dermody, from Students Against War said the policy had created a “bureaucratic nightmare” around notifying university management of upcoming protests. Two security guards shadowed the peaceful protest.
Two ADF aircraft sent to assist Australians stranded in Middle East
Tom McIlroy
The federal government has deployed military assets as part of contingency planning to assist Australians stranded in the Middle East.
As the conflict sparked by American and Israeli strikes on Iran spreads around the region, the government is planning contingencies to help tens of thousands of Australian citizens and permanent residents.
While the government is urging Australians to take up commercial options to get home, Defence has launched Operation Beech, part of the consular effort to provide assistance.
A Royal Australian Air Force C-17A Globemaster heavy transport aircraft and KC-30A multi-role tanker transport have been deployed today as a precautionary measure.
The government will not discuss further specifics like their destination for operational security reasons.
As many as 24,000 Australians are stuck in the United Arab Emirates alone. Some commercial flights to Australia have already started to resume.
The New Zealand government announced on Thursday it will send two defence force aircraft to repatriate its citizens from the region.
Queensland LNP government to ‘transition’ state literary awards to ‘alternative provider’ amid pro-Palestine statements from artists
Queensland’s government is set to stop backing the state’s literary awards and “transition” them to an “alternative” provider.
Last year’s winner, Karen Wyld, was stripped of the award due to comments about Gaza by the state’s arts minister, John-Paul Langbroek. The entire awards ceremony was cancelled as a result.
Earlier that year Landgbroek cut funding to QMUsic’s Queensland Music Awards after it awarded a prize to jazz musician Kellee Green for an instrumental work called “from the river to the sea” – a pro-Palestine phrase which the state government is moving to ban.
Last May, Lanbroek commissioned former supreme court judge Martin Daubney to review the library’s policies in order to strike “a balance between the minister’s priorities and expectations and the proper statutory role of the state library of Queensland”.
Daubney made five recommendations for updated governance processes and a new venue policy for the library.
“The state library will action these recommendations and has also made the decision to transition the Queensland literary Awards to alternative providers,” Langbroek said. “It is also working with Creative Australia to transition [Indigenous writing fellowship] black&write! to an alternative provider.”
Langbroek said the government had “taken decisive action to make Queensland safer”. He said the review had highlighted the need for government-funded arts organisations to assess their risk policies “to ensure they are consistent with and meet the expectations of the Crisafulli government”.
Queensland’s last non-Labor premier, Campbell Newman, cut all funding to the state’s literary prize as one of his first acts.
Turnbull says US will comply with international law ‘only when it suits it’
Speaking on Afternoon Briefing, the former PM Malcolm Turnbull has said the US will comply with international law “only when it suits it”.
Turnbull said Donald Trump had been “very honest” about international law only applying when he wanted it to, citing an interview with the New York Times in January where the president said he was constrained only by his “own morality”. Turnbull said:
Donald Trump is often accused of being a liar, but (on this) he is actually very honest. He was asked if international law applies, and he said no, it does not …
The other day he was asked, what is the worst thing that could happen with Iran? He said the worst thing is we go to all this trouble, assassinate the leader, change the regime and end up with someone who is exactly the same.
Speaking of the shares, there was also some back and forth over when they were actually sold – which we found out was Monday.
The Coalition then pivoted to asking Anne Aly about grant funding for an Islamic community group that mourned the death of the Ayatollah. Aly said the process for that funding has been frozen.
Independent MP Zali Steggall brought up some “abhorrent claims” by Advance Australia and asked if the government would do anything about truth in political advertising laws (there was no commitment to them).
The Greens tried to push the government to put a 25% tax on Australian gas exports – the answer was no.
Independent MP Andrew Wilkie asked the government when they would respond to a two and a half year gambling inquiry report and ban online gambling advertising. Again there was no commitment from the government.
Three Liberal MPs got the boot from the chamber today, meaning Tony Pasin has now been sent out two of four appearances at QT since his move to the frontbench.
Greens say ‘decades of underfunding’ to blame for exodus from public schools
The Greens have blamed “decades of underfunding” for the flight from public schools, with new data released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Thursday showing the percentage of students in government schools has fallen to another record low.
The party’s spokesperson for primary and secondary education, Senator Penny Allman-Payne, said the failure for public schools to reach their full funding levels had left them “struggling to meet the increasingly complex needs of their students, while the richest private schools enjoy taxpayer-funded luxuries”.
Labor claims they’re fully funding public schools by 2034 but it’s a whopping great lie. There is no pathway to full funding. By 2034 every public school in the country, apart from the ACT, will still be below their so-called Gonski funding level.
Meanwhile, the federal government is pouring $20 billion into the private system in 2026, subsidising rich private schools who jack up their fees above inflation every year. If you want to know what the face of the inequality crisis looks like in Australia, this is it.
Work is ‘under way’ to address elder abuse, says attorney-general
Independent MP Rebekha Sharkie asks why the government has not had a national plan to address elder abuse since 2023 when “at least one in 6 older people report experiencing elder abuse and neglect”.
The attorney-general, Michelle Rowland, says elder abuse isn’t talked about enough and that work is being done to combat it.
She says a lot of responsibility lies with the states, and there has been collaboration between the states and commonwealth.
I assure the member that work on that is under way and I will be in a position to make announcements in the near future on how that is progressing.
We are now in a position where we understand the data much more fully, and that is a role that this Government and this portfolio has been fulfilling, and it is one that is informing our policy processes going forward.
Rebello repeats question to Aly about Islamic organisation funding; Aly repeats answer
Liberal MP Leon Rebello is back and asks again if the minister for multicultural affairs has investigated all funding commitments made to organisations who have mourned the death of the ayatollah Ali Khameni?
Anne Aly says again that the funding of the group which the opposition asked about yesterday has been dealt with, with the active grant process stopped by the department.
I’m not quite sure how else I can articulate this other than to repeat that there is an expectation from this government that all organisations that receive funding conduct themselves under the expectations and within the expectations of Australian taxpayers.
The opposition tries to make a point of order, but Milton Dick again shuts it down.
No timeline on response to online gambling inquiry
When will the government respond to the Murphy gambling inquiry and when will it legislate a ban on gambling advertising, asks independent MP, Andrew Wilkie.
It’s been more than two and a half years since the late Peta Murphy delivered a bipartisan report with more than 30 recommendations to tackle online gambling.
Communications and sports minister, Anika Wells, takes the call but doesn’t answer the question.
She says the government has “delivered the most significant online wagering harm reduction initiatives of the past decade, including launching BetStop and banning online use of credit cards for online betting.”
She says a review on BetStop released last week shows it “is a successful policy in delivering on the objectives.”
But the report also warned BetStop was too easy to bypass and failed data matches between the scheme and information held by betting companies were too common.
After a bit of back and fourth on Tim Wilson’s shares in question time today, we have some more clarity on the timing.
DespiteWilson’s register of interests showing that his shares were sold today, we’ve seen an evidence that shows Wilson’s shares were sold on Monday, and the update was submitted to the register on Monday.
Aly questioned over ‘secret and public’ funding to Islamic organisations
Liberal MP Leon Rebello gets the next question and asks the minister for multicultural affairs, Anne Aly, whether the government has investigated all funding, “both secret and public” to Islamic organisations that have mourned the death of the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
It follows questions yesterday about a government grant issued to a Melbourne organisation, the TAHA group, that was reportedly mourning the death of the ayatollah.
Aly says she takes issue with the insertion of “secret” in the question and that all grant decisions are public.
She says she has instructed her department to stop the active grant process for TAHA.
This government takes very seriously the fact that all public funding that goes to any organisation, whether they are cultural organisations or sporting organisations, we take very seriously the role that they play and ensuring that their activities are in line with the standards that Australian taxpayers expect.
Greens pressure government to impose 25% export tax on gas companies
As corporate profiteering by big gas companies sky rockets, Greens MP Elizabeth Watson-Brown asks the government if it will impost a 25% tax on gas exports, something that’s been advocated by the Australian council of trade unions.
The resources minister, Madeleine King, says that imposing new costs on the gas industry would “freeze” production and discourage investment in new supply.
She says gas is still essential for the net zero target.
In relation to putting more costs on to the gas industry, when they do pay a significant amount of tax into our system and I would also add they employ many, many Australians right around the country.
So the short answer is that the government probably won’t be doing that.
Watson-Brown tries to make a point of order but King has already sat down, having finished her answer.