SOURCE: [^albo_republic25]
CITATION: "Anthony Albanese says no republic referendum while he is PM", Sky News Australia / News.com.au, 28 September 2025: https://www.skynews.com.au/breaking-news/anthony-albanese-says-no-republic-referendum-while-he-is-pm/news-story/97f597c21ee93aa0276e5968f3a4e6b7
URL: https://www.skynews.com.au/breaking-news/anthony-albanese-says-no-republic-referendum-while-he-is-pm/news-story/97f597c21ee93aa0276e5968f3a4e6b7
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Anthony Albanese says no republic referendum while he is PM
Anthony Albanese has made a major commitment on a question looming over Australia for nearly 200 years.
Anthony Albanese has declared he will not hold a referendum on a republic while he is prime minister after meeting with King Charles.
The King hosted the Prime Minister at Balmoral Castle on Saturday for a “rather wonderful lunch”, as Mr Albanese described it to the ABC.
In an interview aired on Sunday, he was asked if he had raised the idea of an Australian republic with the monarch.
“No, and I think I’ve made it clear that I wanted to hold one referendum while I was prime minister, and we did that,” Mr Albanese told the national broadcaster, referencing his failed referendum on a Voice to Parliament.
“We did that, and I think we’re concentrating on cost of living, and on making a real practical difference to people’s lives.”
Asked if he thought it “strange” that he had to venture to Scotland to “visit the King of Australia”, Mr Albanese said, “Of course,” adding that King Charles “is fully aware that I support an Australian as our head of state”.
“But I also respect the decisions which have been made and our system of government, and I think that’s important,” he said.
“If you look at the way that I conduct myself, I always support the institutions which are there.”
Pressed further on the role of the Royal Family in modern Australia, he said he thought they still held a “great deal of respect” in the country.
“Their majesties, when they visited Australia recently, King Charles and Queen Camilla were very well received,” Mr Albanese said.
“They work hard. They’re interested in our place in the world.
“They’re very interested in the Commonwealth … and I think they are respected.”
An honour to meet with you today, Your Majesty. pic.twitter.com/K2Pod9RTQb
— Anthony Albanese (@AlboMP) September 27, 2025
The question of whether to do away with the monarchy has loomed over Australia for nearly 200 years.
Ideas of a republic were bandied about well before federation, inspired, in part, by the American Revolution.
But they were not taken seriously, with the 15-minute long battle for the Eureka Stockade in 1854 the closest semblance of a revolution Australia has ever had.
Appetite for a republic grew in the 1990s and a referendum was held in 1999.
But Australians rejected a republic, with just 45.13 per cent backing it.
Polling in recent years has also shown the bulk of Australians would prefer to stick with the Royal Family.
During the King’s visit last year, a Roy Morgan poll found 57 per cent of Australians surveyed believed Australia should stay a constitutional monarchy, while 43 per cent said Australia should become a republic with an elected president.
A YouGov poll in 2023 also showed Australians were not in a rush ditch the Crown.
Meanwhile, the Australian Republican Movement has claimed up to 92 per cent of Australians “are open to becoming a republic”.
Originally published as Anthony Albanese says no republic referendum while he is PM