SOURCE: [^censusbacklash24]
CITATION: "Questions on sexuality and gender have been cut from the 2026 census", ABC News, 29 August 2024: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-28/lgbtqi-2026-census-exclusion-sexuality-gender-questions/104279252
URL: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-28/lgbtqi-2026-census-exclusion-sexuality-gender-questions/104279252
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Questions on sexuality and gender have been cut from the 2026 census. Why are LGBTQIA+ people saying it's an omission?
Wed 28 Aug 2024 at 5:23pm
It comes around every five years and gives the nation an idea of who we are — but next time it rolls around in 2026, the census won't ask about who we love or how we identify.
The federal government's decision to axe proposed questions that would — for the first time — give a number on how many LGBTQIA+ Australians there are has been met with condemnation.
So what happened, and what does it mean?
What is the census?
The census is a five-year mammoth questionnaire mailed out to every household in Australia that asks dozens of questions about those staying at that address on the night, regardless of if they're an adult, child, citizen, resident or visitor.
It creates a picture of Australia through data, by asking things such as each person's age, country of birth, religion, occupation and education to make up a socio-economic snapshot.
The census asks people what their sex is, but does not ask about their sexual orientation — who they are romantically or sexually attracted to — or their gender (meaning whether someone identifies as a man, woman, or non-binary, which can be different from the biological sex of a person or what they were assigned at birth).
The next one is happening in 2026, and the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) is responsible for rolling it out, gathering the data and then analysing what it means.
What happened with the census questions?
After every census, the ABS reviews the questions it includes, proposes some new ones while removing others that may be outdated.
The questions have to be approved by the government and put to parliament before they can be included in the paperwork that everyone receives before the day of the census.
In 1972, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were counted for the first time in the census after Australia voted in the 1967 referendum.
An outcry when the 2021 census did not include questions identifying LGBTQIA+ people prompted leading advocacy organisation Equality Australia and community member April Long to submit a complaint to the Australian Human Rights Commission, saying the omission was an instance of discrimination.
In response, the ABS made a rare "statement of regret", saying it would work with the LGBTQI+ community to alter the 2026 census to ensure no further harm or exclusion was made.
"The ABS has worked, and will continue to work, closely with the LGBTIQ+ community in the development of the Census, surveys and the design of statistical standards and classifications," the statement said.
"The ABS is committed to processes and approaches for the 2026 Census to minimise the risk of further harm."
It added: "The ABS is aware that for some respondents, the absence of questions on their gender identity, variations of sex characteristics or sexual orientation meant that they felt invisible and excluded when completing the Census and in the Census results produced."
It acknowledged some people felt framing and language in previous censuses was "hurtful, confusing, demeaning and discriminatory".
The ABS organised an advisory committee to help it form new questions that would include the LGBTQIA+ community in the 2026 census.
But on Monday, the bureau's head statistician, David Gruen, announced that the testing phase of the 2026 census, when the new questions were to be trialled, was scrapped.
"Given the government's announcement yesterday that topics will remain unchanged from 2021, I have made the decision that the upcoming test will not proceed," Dr Gruen said.
"The test would have included topics that the government has now decided will not be in the 2026 Census."
The minister responsible for the ABS, Dr Andrew Leigh, had been contacted for comment.
Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles said on Wednesday, "we don't want to open up a divisive debate in relation to this issue".
"We've seen how divisive debates have played out across our country, and the last thing we want to do is inflict that debate on a sector of our community right now,"he said.
Labor's 2023 national platform states the party "believes that LGBTIQ+ Australians should be counted as part of the national census" and commits to the 2026 census gathering relevant data on LGBTQI people.
Why is this important to LGBTQIA+ people?
Without the census asking about someone's sexuality or gender, there is no accurate number for how many Australians identify as LGBTQIA+.
Current estimates put LGBTQIA+ people as representing 11 per cent of the population but there is a lack of data on the sexual orientation, gender identity and variations in sex characteristics of the Australian population, a Department of Health study says.
The lack of a population estimate means that services don't know how many people they need to help, and crucially means that government funding isn't guaranteed to services aimed at or including LGBTQIA+ people, groups such as LGBTIQ+ Health Australia say.
Data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics confirms the LGBTQIA+ population suffer from rates of poor mental health — double that of non-LGBTQIA+ people — alongside ongoing discrimination, stigma and barriers to medical treatment.
Having a precise measurement of the community would clarify what services are needed, and where, particularly in regional and rural Australia.
How have people reacted?
Nicky Bath, the chief executive of LGBTIQ+ Health Australia, said the decision was devastating as well as baffling.
Labor's choice "will retain the significant data gaps needed to address the pervasive health and wellbeing disparities that we continue to live with", she said.
"The lives of LGBTIQ+ people are not political footballs."
Equality Australia's chief executive Anna Brown said the decision was a betrayal that rendered LGBTQIA+ individuals and families "invisible".
"Our communities will continue to feel invisible and demeaned because the federal government hasn't taken this opportunity to finally reflect the diversity of Australia and gather crucial information about the kinds of services people need," she said.
Independent MP for Wentworth Allegra Spender said the decision was "inexplicable" from the government, and called on Labor to include the questions to better reflect the diversity of Australia.
"Data informs public policy, and if we have the right data we can make better public decisions," she told ABC RN Breakfast.
"I'm absolutely flabbergasted frankly that the government has decided to stop really sensible progress in the census," Ms Spender said, citing the UK and New Zealand censuses, which ask similar questions on sexual orientation and gender identity.
April Long, who submitted the complaint about the 2021 census to the Australian Human Rights Commission alongside Equality Australia, said their family was "rendered invisible" by the move.
"Every person and every family deserve to be counted," they said.
"After hearing the news, I had to look at my three-year-old son knowing that when he starts school, I won't be able to tell him how many kids are just like him with two mums.
"This isn't just about numbers or data, it's about our basic human right to be counted, recognised and valued.
"It's about ensuring our census counts everyone."