SOURCE: [^electionnight25]
CITATION: Anthony Albanese, "Election night" speech transcript, pm.gov.au, 3 May 2025: https://www.pm.gov.au/media/election-night
URL: https://www.pm.gov.au/media/election-night
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

My fellow Australians.
Serving as your Prime Minister is the greatest honour of my life.
And it is with a deep sense of humility, and a profound sense of responsibility that the first thing I do tonight is say thank you to the people of Australia, for the chance to continue to serve the best nation on earth.
I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay respects to elders past, present and emerging today and everyday.
Today, the Australian people have voted for Australian values.
For fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
For the strength to show courage in adversity and kindness to those in need.
And Australians have voted for a future that holds true to these values.
A future built on everything that brings us together as Australians and everything that sets our nation apart from the world.
In this time of global uncertainty, Australians have chosen optimism and determination.
Australians have chosen to face global challenges, the Australian way – looking after each other, while building for the future.
And to serve these values, meet these challenges, seize these opportunities and build that better and stronger future, Australians have chosen a majority Labor Government.
A majority Labor Government promised and delivered.
A short time ago, I spoke with Peter Dutton who has of course conceded defeat.
I thanked him – what we do in Australia is we treat people with respect. I thanked Peter for his generous words, at the end of what has been a hard-fought campaign.
And I want to take this opportunity to wish Peter and Kirrilly and their family all the very best for their future.
Now at election time, parties and candidates ask people to make a choice.
And, inevitably, the campaign and the coverage is about our differences and our disagreements.
That is the nature of our democracy and it is role of the media who serve it.
But now that the Australian people have made their clear choice, let us all reflect on what we have in common.
Because no matter who you voted for, no matter where you live, no matter how you worship, or who you love.
Whether you belong to a culture that has known and cared for this continent for 65,000 years or you have chosen our nation as your home and enriched our society with your contribution. We are all Australians.
So let all of us work together to build our national unity on the enduring foundations of fairness, equality and respect for one another.
My fellow Australians, I know the world has thrown a lot at our country over the past three years.
I know so many of you have worked hard, in the face of significant challenges.
And I know there is still much more to do, to help people under pressure.
That is why it means so much that in these uncertain times, the people of Australia have placed their trust in Labor once again. Including so many Australians who have voted Labor for the first time.
I make this solemn pledge. We will not forget that. We will never take it for granted.
Repaying your trust will drive our government, each and every day of the next three years.
The positive program we took to this election, was shaped by the Australian people’s priorities.
And our government will dedicate the next three years to making a positive difference to your lives and to your future.
Bringing the rewards for your hard work within reach.
Investing in our youngest Australians, looking after older Australians.
And building an economy and a society that is every bit as strong and fair, as resilient and generous, as Australians are themselves.
From tomorrow – tomorrow, back at work, maybe not everyone here and that’s probably for the best – we take up this task with new hope, new confidence and new determination.
Because together, we are turning the corner and together we will make our way forward with no-one held back and no-one left behind.
Friends, I was raised to be an optimist.
My mum had a hard life, and we struggled financially.
But she taught me to always be positive and see the best in people.
When it comes to Australia’s future, all of us have so much reason to be optimistic.
Because when we look at everything going on around the world today, when we consider the changes that will shape the future of the global economy,
when we think about our people and their smarts and skills, truly, there is nowhere else you’d rather be, than right here in Australia.
This is a time of profound opportunity for our nation.
We have everything we need to seize this moment and make it our own.
And we must do it together, all of us.
Because for Australia to realise our full potential, for our nation to be its very best, every Australian must have the opportunity to be their best.
To serve our Australian values – we must value every Australian and Labor will govern for every Australian.
Every Australian who wants a fair go at work, fair wages for their work and the right to disconnect when they are done with work.
Every Australian who deserves the security of a roof over their head, or who dreams of owning their own home.
Every woman who wants her contribution to our economy and society to be valued equally.
Every parent who wants their child to get the best start in life, with cheaper child care and with fair funding for every student in every school.
Everyone who counts on the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We will be a Government for every Australian who wants to train or re-train for new skills and a good job at public TAFE.
Every Australian who works hard for the life-changing opportunity of higher education and wants 20 per cent cut from their student debt.
Every Australian who knows that climate change is a challenge we must act together to meet, for the future of our environment and knows the fact that renewable energy is an opportunity we must work together to seize for the future of our economy.
We will be a government that supports reconciliation with First Nations people, because we will be a stronger nation when we close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And, friends, we will be a government that relies and helps every Australian who relies on Medicare.
Because this card is not Labor red, or Liberal blue, it is green and gold.
It is a declaration of our national values, in our national colours.
Medicare belongs to all Australians and together, we will make it stronger for all Australians.
Friends, I stand here tonight as the proud leader of an extraordinary team.
I stood on the hallowed turf of the ‘G this morning, doing live crosses making that point. I want to thank all my colleagues, beginning with my friend, our incredible Deputy Prime Minister, Richard Marles. No one could hope for a better Deputy and I thank him so much.
My friend and our Senate Leader, Penny Wong and her Deputy Don Farrell.
Our economic team, led by Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher.
Our campaign spokesperson, Jason Clare. And we’ve got a bit of a shared party tonight, Burke is here, the Member for Watson.
My amazing Labor Caucus, which when you look at it across the benches, it’s representative of the Australian people.
I acknowledge all of our Labor candidates, in every seat, who put up their hand and gave up their time for our cause and their community. If you’ll excuse me, for singling out one of them, who ran for a third time in Dickson, Ali France.
So many of whom will be joining us as Caucus Members of Parliament.
To the people of Grayndler most of whom are here tonight, I’ve got to say something, it was very special, on the way here, I don’t know if there was a drone above us or what have you. My security team said, you know, maybe they’re just out on the street. You know people don’t just hang about Canterbury Rd and from Lilyfield, Liechhardt, all the way here. I’m sorry but I won’t be moving back for a little while.
The people of Grayndler did me an incredible honour in choosing me as their representative, 29 years and 10 elections ago. I’ve lived in this community in the Inner West my whole life, and it is an incredible privilege to serve a community that you love, and I do love it.
To the Labor Party’s heart and soul, our rank and file members and the mighty trade union movement of Australia.
Everywhere I have been through this campaign, your energy, your enthusiasm, your dedication to the cause has lifted me up. The Labor Party will always stand up for jobs and people’s wages and conditions. Everywhere I have been through this campaign, your energy, your enthusiasm, your dedication to the cause has lifted me up.
You inspire all of us in your service of working people and we thank you.
To our magnificent campaign director, National Secretary Paul Erickson.
Paul has run an outstanding campaign, Paul and I did tell people May was the right time. And he managed to become a dad during the campaign. He was supported by an absolutely brilliant team.
All of those dedicated people own a part of this victory and I thank you.
To my personal staff, led by Tim Gartrell. The loyalty, the passion and the commitment that you’ve shown, you have a tough job that you perform with grace, with humour, with joy and a passion for changing our country for the better.
Thank you for what you do.
To my son Nathan, who has grown into a fine young man who I am so proud of, thank you. To my fiancé, Jodie Haydon, probably wasn’t expecting this to be in your life half a dozen years ago. I am so grateful for your support, your friendship and your love.
You make me so happy, which matters, you have my heart, I love you and look forward to living our lives together.
My fellow Australians, Australians have chosen the Australian Labor Party as their government.
And our government will choose the Australian way.
Because we are proud of who we are – and all that we have built together in this country.
We do not need to beg or borrow or copy from anywhere else.
We do not need to seek our inspiration overseas.
We find it right here in our values – and in our people.
Tomorrow, we dedicate ourselves to your service.
We renew the great responsibility and opportunity of government.
And with pride and purpose, optimism and determination, with faith in the fair go and faith in each other.
We return to the work of Building Australia’s Future.
Thank you all.