SOURCE: [^fairgo13]
CITATION: "Albanese launches 'a fair go' leadership campaign", SBS News, 2013: https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/albanese-launches-a-fair-go-leadership-campaign/7cwpm2pq8
URL: https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/albanese-launches-a-fair-go-leadership-campaign/7cwpm2pq8
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Anthony Albanese has reminded the Labor Party that "a fair go" must be at the heart of the party's actions in Opposition.
Mr Albanese has launched his campaign for the Labor leadership at a Trades Hall forum in Sydney.
"A fair go is regarding everyone, every human being, with respect," he said.
"It's recognising the diversity of our society and recognising that we're all enriched by it. It's recognising that we need to look after people and remove any form of discrimination, whether it be on the basis of gender, race, ethnicity, religion, or indeed, who people happen to love."
His candidacy was endorsed by former minister and ACTU boss Greg Combet, who said the aspiring party chief has the "tough stuff" needed to survive what is sure to be a challenging parliament.
News that makes sense
Your trusted source for staying up-to-date with the world around you. Get free daily news updates and analysis, straight to your inbox.
Also bidding for the party's leadership is former Minister for Education and former Minister for Workplace Relations, Bill Shorten.
The result will be announced on October 13 after a postal ballot of Labor's estimated 40,000 members and an October 10 caucus meeting.
Mr Shorten says the majority of the ALP caucus is behind him and that he was encouraged by expressions of support from grassroots members.
But that didn't stop Labor frontbencher Penny Wong throwing her support behind Mr Albanese for leader.
Former climate change minister Greg Combet, who introduced the aspiring opposition leader at the lauch, is also backing Mr Albanese.
"You've got to be clear in mind about your values, your policies... and articulate that to the community," he told AAP.
"Most importantly, you've got to be tough and fight hard and Anthony has all those attributes. I think the times demand him."
But he expects Mr Shorten will have a lot of support particularly in his home state of Victoria.
"He'd be a great leader if he was elected too," Mr Combet said.
It is understood Mr Shorten, the Right faction powerbroker, can count on about 54 per cent of the caucus vote.
But the grassroots membership skews to the Left and is likely to favour Mr Albanese.
Mr Albanese is embarking on a three-city tour over the next three days and will be taking along his three word slogan "Vision. Unity. Strength."
Acting Labor leader Chris Bowen wouldn't endorse either contender but would attend campaign events if both aspirants were present.
Mr Shorten said he and Mr Albanese had agreed to a "civil debate about ideas, not personalities".
The pair also agreed that the loser of the ballot would still get a senior role in opposition.
Asked whether he and Mr Albanese had policy differences, Mr Shorten said their values were "quite similar".
But he added that issues surrounding services for people with disabilities must be kept at the centre of the political stage, and that Labor must still keep the Abbott government accountable during the leadership contest.
Mr Shorten appears to favour outgoing health minister Tanya Plibersek for the opposition deputy leader position, if she chose to run.
Bookmakers have Mr Albanese a clear favourite.