SOURCE: [^farrerprefs26]
CITATION: "Nationals choose Farrer candidate as Albanese calls on Coalition to put One Nation last", Region Riverina, 8 March 2026: https://regionriverina.com.au/nationals-choose-farrer-candidate-as-albanese-calls-on-coalition-to-put-one-nation-last/120917/
URL: https://regionriverina.com.au/nationals-choose-farrer-candidate-as-albanese-calls-on-coalition-to-put-one-nation-last/120917/
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

The National Party and One Nation have both chosen their candidates for the Farrer by-election after completing their preselection processes this weekend.
The Nationals selected retired army colonel Brad Robertson, while businessman David Farley will represent Pauline Hansonâs party.
Mr Robertson was raised in Bathurst and his final military posting was as commander of the Joint Logistics Unit at Bandiana in Victoria. He served in the Australian Army for 30 years and is now a board member of the Albury Wodonga Regional Cancer Centre Trust Fund.
Mr Farley was born and bred in Narrandera, has worked for agribusinesses overseas and is now chairman of the advocacy group Speak Up 4 Water.
The duo join Independent Michelle Milthorpe, who finished second on primary votes at the 2022 election, as among those who will contest the seat.
Labor is not expected to field a candidate, leaving the Liberal Party â which has held the seat for 25 years â as the only major party yet to announce its contender. Liberal state Albury MP Justin Clancy had considered running but withdrew his name from consideration last week.
The ABCâs Insiders program on Sunday revealed the first Farrer poll is set to be released in the coming days. It reportedly shows One Nation coming first and Ms Milthorpe second, with the Liberals and Nationals a long way behind â meaning preferences could prove crucial.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese weighed into the debate during a recent visit to Albury, urging the Coalition to recommend putting One Nation last on their how-to-vote cards.
âThey canât just be One Nation lite, coming up with similar policies to One Nation. They need to be responsible going forward. John Howard always put One Nation last on the how-to-vote of the Liberal Party. Weâll wait and see what decisions Angus Taylor and David Littleproud are prepared to make,â he said.
Mr Farley said he feared the major parties would collude to try to stop One Nation from winning its first seat in federal parliament after trying to do so for 30 years.
âWhatâs theyâre proposing is very disingenuous to the constituents and their rights under our democracy,â he said.
The Coalition parties have not made a decision on preferences on their how-to-vote cards as yet.
Just before his successful preselection, Mr Farley told Region he believes he has “the capacity, skills and tenacity to represent Farrer on the critical issues are needed.”
Reform of MurrayâDarling Basin policies will be at the top of his agenda.
âWhy is water being managed as an environmental asset when it should be managed as a sovereign asset?â
âThe Murry Darling Basin Authority is has reached well beyond his remit.”
Mr Farley welcomed NSW MP Helen Daltonâs decision on Friday not to give up her state seat to join the race run for federal parliament.
âItâs good for Farrer and Murray. On Helenâs behalf, it shows that she is looking after her constituents. She has proved her capabilities; she has proved her tenacity and she has runs on the board.â
The by-election, caused by the resignation of sitting member Sussan Ley, will be held on Saturday 9 May 2026.