SOURCE: [^hansard14feb24]
URL: Local Hansard Corpus Line 7796
STATUS: Full content restored

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

In the last 24 hours nature has thrown everything at the people of Victoria-bushfires, extreme heat, wild winds, damaging storms and flash flooding. Tragically, in Gippsland the storms have claimed the life of a local farmer, and we offer our heartfelt condolences to everyone touched by this loss. I ask the member for Gippsland to please pass that on to his electorate. I'm sure by now all of us have seen those extraordinary images of the transmission towers near Geelong that have been flattened by the winds, leaving hundreds of thousands of homes and businesses without power. I know that the state government is working around the clock to deal with this situation, and the SES, as always, have been working hard throughout the night to provide assistance to people. Even as parts of Melbourne have been battered by rain and hail, there are bushfires in the Grampians that are still burning out of control. The town of Pomonal has suffered the worst of it. Homes have been lost, as has the local church. At this stage, there has been no loss of life reported, which all of us desperately hope remains the case. Yesterday five CFA firefighters sustained minor injuries while working to protect properties in the area. We wish each of them a speedy recovery, and our thoughts are with all those engaged in the difficult and dangerous work of fighting these fires. Everyone who has spent time in the Grampians and surrounds knows what a beautiful part of Australia it is. These towns facing the fire front are proud, tight-knit communities. People look out for their neighbours and they look after each other. As ever, in the worst of times, we are seeing the best of the Australian character. To all those who spent an anxious night in the Stawell community centre, the Haddon recreation centre or the Ararat emergency relief centre, we are thinking of you. To everyone in the area, please stay safe. Do everything you can to stay up to date with warnings and forecasts. Do not take risks. Please follow the advice of the local authorities. I know I speak for every member in this place when I say the Commonwealth is ready to do whatever we can to help Victorians through these hard days and to assist communities with the work of recovery. I thank the House.