SOURCE: [^isuravdawn24]
URL: https://www.pm.gov.au/media/anzac-day-dawn-service-2024
STATUS: Full content restored

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

1. Home
2. Media
3. Anzac Day Dawn Service

[](https://www.facebook.com/AlboMP) [](https://x.com/AlboMP) [](https://www.linkedin.com/in/albomp/) [](https://www.instagram.com/albomp)

# Anzac Day Dawn Service

Speech

Thursday 25 April 2024

Isurava, Papua New Guinea

The Hon Anthony Albanese MP

Prime Minister of Australia

Listen

We gather today on ground made hallow by Australian sacrifice.

Where we now have the privilege of joining together in peace and liberty, Australian soldiers fought to hold back a relentless enemy.

Six hundred and twenty-five Australians were killed on the Kokoda Track. Of those, 99 fell in the Battle of Isurava and 111 more were wounded.

And we remember and honour them this morning.

We gather today in the final shadows of night because the first Anzacs did.
Half a world away and already more than a century distant, they clambered into their boats their voices barely whispers, the water a rippling darkness stretching before them to that most fateful of shores.

Year in, year out we gather before the dawn for the generations of Australians since Gallipoli who have served in our name.

Every Anzac Day, across Australia and in battlefields like this one, we honour all who have served, and all who continue to serve today.

It is a collective act of remembrance, reflection and gratitude carried out by multiple generations of Australians.

Those who enlisted for the Second World War grew up in an Australia scarred by the memory of the First.

They were the first generation to have attended dawn services. They knew the names of the dead on the cenotaphs and memorials.

Indeed, some were the sons and nephews of the first Anzacs – and there were even some of those Anzacs among them.
Whatever sense of romance and adventure there had been in 1914 was long gone.

Yet they came.

We are gathered in a place that has known the most pitiless ferocity of battle, fought with bullet, bayonet, mortar, and the desperation of bare hands.

It is also a place that has seen the unadorned strength of the Australian spirit.

What happened here resulted in the first Victoria Cross awarded to an Australian on what was then considered Australian territory.

The recipient of that Victoria Cross was Private Bruce Kingsbury of the Second Fourteenth Battalion. In the words of Lieutenant-Colonel Ralph Honner, he gave “his life that his comrades and his country might live”.

In our pride we feel the weight of history as we gather here along the Kokoda Track, this great artery of mud and suffering and perseverance that has come to occupy a place of singular power in Australia’s shared memory.

...

We try to hear their voices, maybe their laughter, maybe their songs and the jokes they told even as their faces grew waxen, their beards matted with dirt and their dream of seeing home again hung by the flimsiest of threads.

We think of how gravely they were tested.

We remember them — not just for their courage, even though there were times their courage was almost beyond our comprehension.

But we also remember their fear – young, far from home, and confronting the unimaginable as it became reality.

In the words of Private Bill Spencer:

_“You don’t want to give up, but you wish to Christ you were somewhere else!”_

Even in their extraordinariness, they were human beings of flesh and blood.

As were their families.

Decades of war have built a universe of loss, constellations of grief spelt out on tombstones, inscriptions from loved ones aching with all that has been taken, and all that might have been.

We gather for all who went in our name, and never came home.