SOURCE: [^medicare2026]
CITATION: "The Albanese Government delivers all Medicare Urgent Care Clinics promised", Prime Minister of Australia, 17 June 2026: https://www.pm.gov.au/media/albanese-government-delivers-all-medicare-urgent-care-clinics-promised
URL: https://www.pm.gov.au/media/albanese-government-delivers-all-medicare-urgent-care-clinics-promised
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

The Albanese Government has delivered on its election commitment to open an additional 50 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics with the final clinic opening in Caloundra, Queensland today.
Medicare Urgent Care Clinics are providing cost of living relief, helping families access healthcare without the cost, providing free Medicare-backed care close to home.
The opening is a historic milestone meaning all 137 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics promised by the Government are now operating around the country.
Clinics provide free Medicare-backed care for urgent, but not life-threatening, illnesses and injuries. No appointment needed. No out-of-pocket costs. And they are here to stay.
The Albanese Government delivered a major Medicare investment in the Budget, making Medicare Urgent Care Clinics a permanent part of Australia’s health system.
The significant health measure includes an additional $1.8 billion over five years from 2025-26 and $525.6 million a year ongoing from 2030-31 to keep Medicare Urgent Care Clinics open and free.
There have been more than 3.1 million visits to Medicare Urgent Care Clinics across Australia since the first one opened in June 2023, with projections to deliver 2 million instances of care per year with all clinics now open.
More than one in four of these presentations were patients aged under 15 years old, more than one in four were on weekends, and one in four were after 5pm on weekdays when many GPs are not available.
A recent interim evaluation report of the Medicare Urgent Care Clinics Program found:
- Medicare Urgent Care Clinics are achieving their purpose in delivering urgent care services and reducing equivalent Emergency Department presentations by around 10% nationally.
- 45% of patients reported that they would have sought care in an Emergency Department or called an ambulance if the Medicare Urgent Care Clinic was not available. This increased to 48% in the afterhours period.
- Patients are satisfied with the care they receive, and staff enjoy the variety of working across both general practice and urgent care.
With the opening of the final clinic, four out of five Australians will now live within a 20-minute drive of a Medicare Urgent Care Clinic.
The Caloundra Medicare Urgent Care Clinic will be the 26th clinic to open in Queensland, located at Shop 1, Little Mountain Central Shopping Centre, 65 Pierce Avenue, Little Mountain.
Quotes attributable to Prime Minister Anthony Albanese
“Medicare Urgent Care Clinics help patients get the care they need for free and ease pressure on hospitals.
“Now that all of Labor’s clinics are open, four in five Australians will live within a 20-minute drive of a bulk billed Medicare Urgent Care Clinic.
“When you go to an Urgent Care Clinic, all you will need is your Medicare card, not your credit card.”
Quotes attributable to Minister Butler
“Labor promised an additional 50 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics at the last election and our Government has delivered on that promise.
“Across Australia, Medicare Urgent Care Clinics are fulfilling their promise by making sure Australians can walk in and receive urgent care quickly and for free, seven days a week over extended hours.
“They are making a real difference, for patients and for busy hospital emergency departments. More clinics, in more locations, and all patients need is their Medicare card.”
Quotes attributable to Senator Mulholland
“The Albanese Government is delivering for people in Caloundra with the opening of the Caloundra Medicare Urgent Care Clinic.
“This clinic will be a game changer in an area of high population growth, particularly young families.
“All people in Caloundra and the surrounding region will need is their Medicare card, not their credit card, to get the urgent care they need.”