SOURCE: [^mostynlive24]
CITATION: "Sam Mostyn sworn in as governor general – as it happened", The Guardian live politics blog, 1 July 2024: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2024/jul/01/australia-politics-news-live-stage-three-tax-cuts-inflation-interest-rates-chalmers-labor-fatima-payman-nsw-coercive-control
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2024/jul/01/australia-politics-news-live-stage-three-tax-cuts-inflation-interest-rates-chalmers-labor-fatima-payman-nsw-coercive-control
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

That brings the blog to a close this first day of the month, but first let’s recap the main events:
Anne Alysaid she hoped Fatima Payman remained a Labor senator. Anthony Albanesesaid the Greens’ “stunt” was designed to put Payman in a difficult position.
Sam Mostyn was sworn in as governor general. The prime minister saidMostyn would be “an outstanding leader”. The new governor general said testing times’ called for kindness, care and respect.
International student visa fees more than doubled overnight.
Andrew Wilkieseconded Rebekha Sharkie’s private member’s bill on gambling ads, saying it was “way beyond time”.
The health minister, Mark Butler,told shops to stop selling vapes as new laws begin.
Mehreen Faruqi denounced Labor’s “shameful” suspension of Payman as Albanese urges that “we take the temperature down” on the Gaza debate.
Payman released a statement on social media saying she’d been “exiled” from Labor.
Amy will be back with you bright and early in the morning.
Coercive-control laws to protect NSW women come into force
NSW is safer for women after becoming the first Australian jurisdiction to criminalise coercive control as a standalone offence, a family violence expert says.
AAP reports that legislation criminalising repeated patterns of physical or non-physical abuse used to hurt, scare, intimidate, threaten or control someone passed the NSW parliament in 2022 and came into effect today.
Its introduction was delayed to allow time to educate police, the judiciary and the public, with perpetrators facing jail for up to seven years if found guilty.
Women’s Community Shelters chief executive Annabelle Daniel said NSW residents should be extremely proud to live in a state taking serious action on coercive control.
She said:
With this reform, we can now tell women seeking support at our services that the patterns of abuse that they’ve experienced are criminal.
This legislation will improve the lives of women and children who may never seek to use the legal system … the police and court system personnel are trained to identify patterns of abuse, and we’ll be less likely to misidentify the perpetrator of abuse when they attend to incidents.
Coercive control was a precursor to 97% of intimate partner domestic violence homicides in NSW between 2000 and 2018. Daniel said:
But it’s also really important to note coercive control deserves to be criminalised because it in itself is intimate partner terrorism, whether or not it leads to domestic homicide.
Tougher bail laws mean people charged with serious domestic violence offences, with a maximum imprisonment of 14 years or more, must now demonstrate why they should not remain in custody.
These include sexual assault, kidnapping, and choking to render someone unconscious with intent to commit another indictable offence in intimate partner relationships.
Teacher dies after falling through Melbourne school roof
A teacher has died after falling from a roof at a school in Spotswood, in Melbourne’s inner city, on Thursday.
Authorities believe he was trying to retrieve a ball from the roof.
WorkSafe Victoria made a statement today about the incident they are investigating:
It is believed the 61-year-old man was retrieving balls from the roof when he fell through a skylight more than three metres to the concrete ground below about 2:30pm.
He was taken to hospital with critical head injuries, where he died on Friday.
… The death is the 23rd confirmed workplace fatality for 2024. There were 41 work-related deaths at the same time last year.
Nationals senator Matt Canavan is criticising Labor’s collectivist principles. Appearing on ABC Afternoon Briefing, he said:
When you elect a Labor MP, you elect a robot. They’re just here to churn out the talking points they’re given every day.
Good on Senator Payman, she’s got more courage than the lot of them combined.
Labor MP Sam Rae defended his party, saying it was not about command and control, or automatons, but rather the principles of movement.
We’re a collectivist movement. The Labor party is a collectivist party and we believe the cause of serving working people is far more important than any single individual, and this is at the core of this issue: the principle of collectivist action.
‘Up to’ Payman whether she rejoins Labor caucus – McAllister
Good afternoon! Staying with Senator Fatima Payman’s position in the Labor party, Labor frontbencher Senator Jenny McAllister said Payman would be able to rejoin caucus if she could show she accepted the convention of collective decision-making.
McAllister spoke to ABC’s Afternoon Briefing soon after question time but before the release of Payman’s statement, and said Payman showed she was not willing to accept the principles of collective decision-making:
Senator Payman’s decision both in the chamber and by her words over the weekend indicate she’s not willing to accept that and it’s on that basis she’s been suspended from the caucus.
Greg Jennings asked McAllister about Payman not attending a division earlier and she said:
Senator Payman has indicated at this point she isn’t willing to accept those disciplines and so she’s not able to participate in the ordinary processes of our group.
On whether she could rejoin caucus in future, McAllister said:
It’s really up to Senator Payman.
I think it’s been made very clear that should Senator Payman wish to resume observing those conventions, she’d be able to rejoin.
On that note, Natasha May is going to take you through the rest of the evening, while the Canberra team continue to update you on what is happening in parliament.
Make sure you keep checking back to see what is happening – and thank you so much for joining me so far today. I’ll be back tomorrow morning with the next politics live edition – until then, take care of you. Ax
Fatima Payman’s Facebook post has been up for just 10 minutes and already has close to 60 comments – overwhelmingly in support of the senator and her actions.
Yesterday the prime minister suspended me indefinitely from the Australian Labor party caucus.
Since then, I have lost all contact with my caucus colleagues. I have been removed from caucus meetings, committees, internal group chats, and whips bulletins.
I have been told to avoid all chamber duties that require a vote including divisions, motions and matters of public interest.
I have been exiled.
These actions lead me to believe that some members are attempting to intimidate me into resigning from the Senate.
As a result, I will abstain from voting on Senate matters for the remainder of the week, unless a matter of conscience arises where I’ll uphold the true values and principles of the Labor party.
I will use this time to reflect on my future and the best way to represent the people of Western Australia.
Accounting body decries ‘outrageous’ hike in international student visa fees
The government’s decision to more than double the cost of international student visas has upset the CPA.
CPA Australia’s business investment and international lead, Gavan Ord,said the sector was “critical to Australia’s economy, society and influence” and the “government’s decision to drastically increase the cost of non-refundable visa applications for international students is outrageous”.
Australia is highly regarded as a destination for international education. However, the government cannot assume that this advantage is permanent. Students have choices and many other governments are investing heavily to improve their tertiary education sectors to attract such students.
Poorly considered policies focused on achieving short-term domestic objectives, like this significant fee hike, runs the real risk of making Australia seem lesswelcoming to international students.
Any reforms in this area must be very carefully considered and debated. Wrong steps can have significant short- and long-term implications for Australia.
Australia is already experiencing a shortage of qualified accountants and many other occupations. Any measures that are designed to reduce the number of genuine international students who wish to study accounting will exacerbate this shortage and have a negative knock-on effect to Australian business and the economy as a whole.
Pilots’ vote sends ‘strong message to Virgin’, union says
More on the news that pilots at Virgin Australia have voted down a controversial proposal from the airline to strip them of six days off per year in a new enterprise agreement, in a ballot that was defeated 61% to 39%.
The Australian Federation of Air Pilots (AFAP), the union that represents roughly 75% of unionised pilots at Virgin, had encouraged its members to vote in favour, while the Transport Workers Union (TWU), representing about 25% of unionised pilots at the airline, had staunchly opposed the pay deal, insisting the extra days off were crucial in light of Virgin abandoning a pledge to upgrade what had been criticised as deficient rostering software.
Virgin Australia’s chief pilot, Alex Scamps, claimed the new deal would still have left pilots with “the most generous days off for any major airline in Australia” and strengthened work-life balance and fatigue management protections.
He said:
We acknowledge and respect the feedback from our pilots and we will continue to work with the AFAP and the TWU to address the key areas raised.
The TWU national secretary, Michael Kaine, said:
This vote sends a strong message to Virgin and owners Bain Capital to listen to pilots’ concerns and return to negotiations ready to work together on the constructive solutions already put forward by the TWU pilots committee. With a few key adjustments, Virgin pilots can very soon have an agreement worth voting for.
AFAP, in an email its negotiating team sent to members seen by Guardian Australia, said: “While we are disappointed with the result, we accept that a democratic process has taken place and the views of the majority of the pilot group must be respected.
Negotiators would now “go through a process to understand the reasons for the no vote” before resuming negotiations with Virgin.
Pilots reject Virgin Australia deal cutting annual days off
Pilots at Virgin Australia have rejected the airline’s push to strip them of six days off per year, with less than 40% voting in favour despite the proposed enterprise agreement being endorsed by the union that represents the majority of pilots.
Under Virgin pilots’ existing enterprise agreement, which lapsed at the end of June, pilots were entitled to 12 days off every 28-day roster period, of which there are 13 periods a year. For the new deal, Virgin Australia had been proposing that for six of the 13 roster periods, days off would be cut to 11. The designated days off are in addition to annual leave.
As part of the proposed deal, pilots would receive a 9.38% pay rise in the first year, and 3% rises in the second and third years, in return for the loss of the six days off.
The Australian Federation of Air Pilots (AFAP), the union which represents roughly 75% of unionised pilots at Virgin, had encouraged its members to vote in favour, while the Transport Workers Union (TWU), representing about 25% of unionised pilots at the airline, had staunchly opposed the pay deal, insisting the extra days off were crucial in light of Virgin abandoning a pledge to upgrade what had been criticised as deficient rostering software.