SOURCE: [^sbsspill26]
CITATION: "'History not positive': Albanese warns of leaders spill amid Keir Starmer resignation reports", SBS News, 21 June 2026: https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/albanese-warns-against-leadership-spill-as-uks-starmer-set-to-quit/aqf6z670x
URL: https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/albanese-warns-against-leadership-spill-as-uks-starmer-set-to-quit/aqf6z670x
FETCHED: 2026-07-06 (auto, via fetch_archive.py / trafilatura)
STATUS: fetched, NOT yet independently read/verified against any node claim -- update Sources_Verification_Checklist.md after review

---EXTRACTED TEXT---

Australia's Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has warned against a leadership change in the United Kingdom amid reports his British Labour counterpart Keir Starmer could be about to resign.
Britain's Observer newspaper is reporting Starmer is expected to resign on Monday and set out a timetable for his departure.
The Observer report, which did not name its sources, said Starmer had reached the conclusion that his position was no longer tenable after speaking to cabinet ministers, advisers, donors and trade union leaders.
However, a government source said Starmer remained focused on getting on with the job of governing.
'I've dealt with four British prime ministers'
News that makes sense
Your trusted source for staying up-to-date with the world around you. Get free daily news updates and analysis, straight to your inbox.
Asked about the potential change by Sky News on Sunday morning, Albanese said he will "deal with whoever is elected".
"But I must say that the history of just changing leaders is not a positive one," he said. "I've dealt with already four British prime ministers since I've been elected as prime minister."
Speculation of Starmer's retirement has been building for months and has accelerated since Friday, when his rival Andy Burnham won more than 50 per cent of the vote in the Makerfield byelection, officially allowing him to now launch a formal leadership challenge.
Burnham, the 56-year-old mayor of Greater Manchester, is widely seen as Starmer's most likely successor, whether through a negotiated transfer of power or a formal leadership contest.
He used his victory speech to promise a new path for the United Kingdom, rather than launching an immediate formal challenge.
Starmer said on Friday he would fight any challenge to his leadership and urged Labour not to tear itself apart with infighting.
Starmer led the centre-left Labour party to a landslide election win in 2024, but became deeply unpopular after a series of scandals, policy U-turns and local election defeats.
More than 100 elected lawmakers in Starmer's party - roughly a quarter of all Labour representatives in the House of Commons - have publicly said they want him to quit or set out a timetable for his exit, according to a Reuters tally.
If he were to quit or be ousted, it would be the United Kingdom's seventh prime minister in just over a decade — the highest turnover in nearly two centuries.
Albanese has previously backed Starmer's leadership, in May saying: "He is a friend of mine, and I hope that Keir Starmer continues to serve as prime minister of the United Kingdom", and warning that the, "revolving door of leaders does not lead to stability".
Last year, amid rumours about a potential leadership challenge against Starmer, Albanese made a high-profile appearance at the UK Labour Party Conference where he pitched Starmer's credentials.
On stage at the Liverpool conference, Albanese vowed to "defend democracy itself" as the two leaders embraced. The Opposition at the time criticised Albanese, saying he "crossed the line" by addressing the conference.
Albanese talks up his own stability
Albanese also took the questioning as an opportunity to urge stability — both in the UK and more locally in Australia from his own opponents.
"I think stability is a good thing," he said. "I'm on my fourth Liberal party leader as well."
"I don't know how many National Party leaders as well. But you know, they haven't even got a National party leader is in the House of Representatives at the moment."
Angus Taylor was elected the new leader of the Liberal Party in February after winning a spill motion against Sussan Ley.
Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton have also led the party during Albanese's tenure as prime minister.
Long-time Nationals leader David Littleproud also resigned in March and was later replaced by Matt Canavan.
"A lot of chaos has occurred in global politics," Albanese added.
He credited his government with providing "stability", while rejecting speculation about who would lead the party after him.
Asked if Mark Butler would be his "heir apparent", Albanese said his government was a "united team".
"No one in our caucus is worried about that."
— With additional reporting by Reuters.
For the latest from SBS News, download our app and subscribe to our newsletter.